Money is an invention of society. It was contrived by society to represent value, just the same way numbers were created represent quantities.
Money has evolved and taken many forms over the centuries. With each stage of evolution, came a better system of keeping, exchanging and transferring value.
Money had to change because the world was looking for the best means of facilitating payments, keeping financial records and measuring value. Each item used as money came with two different values; intrinsic value (value in use) and face value (value in exchange). There were problems associated with each form of money, necessitating the next step in the money evolution.
First, human populations in deliberate societies did direct exchange of value for value (trade by barter), or Counter trade (in the context of international trade). Next, it was use of special standard commodities as money (cattle, elephant tusk, and cowries). Later, precious metals Silver, gold and copper were used as money. The term money came from Greek civilization, at a time when coins were mined in the temple goddess "Moneta".
The Chinese were the first to use paper as money, but the British popularized it with their goldsmiths issuing paper receipts for gold deposits with them. In time, these paper moneys became issued by them monarch as represented by the Bank of England, and the goldsmiths became the early bankers. It is interesting to note that paper money was backed by an underlying asset(gold). The banks took the idea of paper money further, and introduced bank money (use of cheques). In our time came fiat money (paper money backed by government authority), electronic money and digital money (cryptocurrencies).
The idea in "moneyvolution" was to find that perfect object that was lightweight, universally accepted, efficient in use, difficult to fake, scarce and therefore valuable, stable in value and ensuring maximum speed of transactions. The world wanted a perfect system of value ownership and transfer that is laced with security,trust, economy, accountability and transparency.
The advent of computers, the internet and telecommunications technology in general has made it possible for the world to evolve a payment system that is secure, decentralized, efficient, fast, trustworthy and perfectly accountable.
The Blockchain technology is a triple entry based ledger (recording) system that boasts security, immutability and transparency in the recording, ownership and transfer of value. It is this technology that makes cryptocurrencies possible.
Cryptocurrencies (Bitcoins, Ethereum, Litcoins, Ripple and other Altcoins) are money in the form of computer code. They are monies created using computer cryptography, making it accessible through computers, tablets and smartphones.
They are created by miners who invest computing power to make them by solving complex mathematical puzzles which increase in difficulty as more of them are created. The miners are independent of each other and the government and get rewarded by a fraction of the value they create.
Cryptocurrencies can be bought and kept in secure personal wallets like your bank account, traded with people in a crypto currency exchange (Gemini, Coinbase, Binance etc), like the stock exchange or foreign exchange market.
They can be used to purchase goods in stores and countries who officially recognised them, and can be used in decentralized finance to operationalize blockchain based smart contracts.
They are independent of the current central banking arrangement (financial system) and their values are dependent on the demand and supply variables within their ecosystem.
It is important to note that unlike fiat currencies (the paper money and coins that are widely in use), which is often backed by government authority, foreign currency holdings, government securities, and private institutions physical and virtual assets, cryptocurrencies are not tied to the value of any tangible asset (except for stable coins that may be tied to the Dollar or any reference currency).
Their values are dependent on scarcity, trust within the community, demand and supply parameters and their general acceptability). There are currently over 5700 cryptocurrencies in the world with different exchange values to the dominant fiat currencies in the world.
There are manifold centralized and decentralized cryptocurrency exchanges, offering custody and trading facilities. Ethereum ( the second largest cryptocurrency by captalization) for instance, also offers blockchain applications such as decentralized finance and smart contracts, making it very valuable in the community.
There are thousands of brokers, smart contract cryptocurrency funded projects and many cryptocurrency investment companies in the space. In the last decade starting from issuance of Bitcoins (the pioneer and leading crypto currency) in 2009, there has been a surge in the value of most cryptocurrencies in thousands percent rates.
Someone who bought a hundred thousand dollar worth of bitcoins in 2009 and kept it in his wallet till now, will be worth billions of dollars by now.
However, the ride to the rise of cryptocurrencies have not been easy or rosy. Their prices have been volatile, with sometimes wide swings in prices within short periods. Bitcoins for instance has been hit by good and bad publicity, with governments and traditional finance institutions feeling threatened by their popularity with people who prefer anonymity, speed, lower transaction costs and despise institutionally regulated finance (the underground economy so to speak).
These old guards will scream "death to cryptocurrencies", calling for it's regulation and censorship. In recent years however, attitudes have been changing regarding cryptos. The US government, European Central Bank, The Russian Federation administration, China communist government and some other governments have been investigating the blockchain technology and studying it's potential application to creating digital equivalents of their fiat currencies.
Corporations like Facebook, Amazon, Paypal and others have taken an active interest in the crypto currency space with crypto specific projects of their own. Programmers and traditional finance institutions are also looking in to build new digital applications in terms of fund management, portfolio management, investment vehicles, enhanced software, and interoperability of applications.
Attitudes keep changing in the positive direction for blockchain and cryptocurrencies in general.
All these developments can only point to a future world dominated by cryptocurrencies and other Blockchain applications or a hybrid system informed by a compromise of both systems of finance (traditional and progressive).
The future is undoubtedly going to be a digitally smart world with 5, 6, and 7Generations technology and the Internet of Things revolution. Digital technologies will win the battle of supremacy, the way the electronic mail system won the battle against the traditional mail system for moving correspondencies, leaving it to a national heritage that we want to keep for political and cultural reasons only.
For the individual like you and me, we must use information from the big picture to position ourselves to take advantage of the current knowledge gap, and information asymmetry in relation to the alternative system and the bandwagon effect that will ultimately result from a mainstream adoption of cryptocurrency or their equivalents in the future.
Invest in cryptocurrencies today. Study the underlying technologies, institutions and economics that support them. Take the baby steps to the digital, economic and social education that will enable you develop competence in future finance management. With all other good things that will come with it, Money and profit is involved.
